0 the eastern phoebe (sayornis phoebe) is a small passerine bird .
1  the genus name sayornis is constructed from the specific part of charles lucien bonaparte's name for say's phoebe , muscicapa saya , and ancient greek ornis , "bird" .
2  phoebe is an alternative name for the roman moon-goddess diana , but it may also have been chosen to imitate the bird's call .
3 this tyrant flycatcher breeds in eastern north america , although its normal range does not include the southeastern coastal united states .
4 it is migratory , wintering in the southernmost usa and central america .
5  it is a very rare vagrant to western europe .
6  this is one of the first birds to return to the breeding grounds in spring and one of the last to leave in the fall .
7  they arrive for breeding in mid-late march , but they return to winter quarters around the same time when other migrant songbirds do , in september and early october; migration times have stayed the same in the last 100 years .
8 this species appears remarkably big-headed , especially if it puffs up the small crest .
9  its plumage is gray-brown above .
10  it has a white throat , dirty gray breast and buffish underparts which become whiter during the breeding season .
11  two indistinct buff bars are present on each wing .
12  its lack of an eye ring and wingbars , and its all dark bill distinguish it from other north american tyrant flycatchers , and it pumps its tail up and down like other phoebes when perching on a branch .
13  the eastern phoebe's call is a sharp chip , and the song , from which it gets its name , is fee-bee .
14 the eastern wood pewee (contopus virens) is extremely similar in appearance and voice .
15  it lacks the buff hue usually present on the lighter parts of the eastern phoebe's plumage , and thus has always clearly defined and contrasting wing-bars .
16  it also does not bob its tail habitually , and appears on the breeding grounds much later though it leaves for winter quarters at about the same time as the eastern phoebe .
17 the breeding habitat of the eastern phoebe is open woodland , farmland and suburbs , often near water .
18  this phoebe is insectivorous , and often perches conspicuously when seeking food items .
19  it also eats fruits and berries in cooler weather .
20 it often nests on human structures such as bridges and buildings .
21  nesting activity may start as early as the first days of april .
22  the nest is an open cup with a mud base and lined with moss and grass , built in crevice in a rock or man-made site; 38 eggs are laid .
23  both parents feed the young and usually raise two broods per year .
24  the eastern phoebe is occasionally host to the nest-parasitic brown-headed cowbird (molothrus ater) .
