0 the white-necked raven (corvus albicollis) is somewhat smaller (5054 cm in length) than the common raven or indeed its nearest relative , the thick-billed raven c .
1  crassirostris .
2  like the common raven , thick-billed raven and brown-necked raven , it is one of the larger raven species .
3  the smaller raven species are the australian raven , forest raven , little raven , fan-tailed raven and chihuahuan raven with the thick-billed raven being the world's largest raven species and the chihuahuan raven being the smallest .
4 the white-necked raven has a much shorter tail than the common raven , as well as a deeper bill with a white tip that is almost as strongly arched as that of the thick-billed raven .
5  though predominantly black , the throat , breast and neck show a faint purple gloss .
6  there is a large patch of white feathers on the nape of the neck .
7 soars well with shallower wingbeats than other corvidae .
8 often described as a raven with a sore throat , it has very similar calls to the common raven , but with a more husky note .
9  it has a croak like the raven but with a more whispering note added .
10 it occurs in eastern and southern africa in open , mountainous country .
11  it is quite commonly found in small towns and villages as long as there are mountains or hills for roosting and nesting relatively nearby .
12 most of this bird's food is obtained from the ground , but it will take food from trees as well .
13  it has been seen to drop a tortoise from a height on to hard ground , preferably on rocks , and then swoop down to eat it , or even pick it up again if not sufficiently broken .
14  white-necked ravens will also readily take carrion from road kills .
15  fruit , grain , insects , small reptiles , peanuts and human food are also readily taken and the bird forages in back yards and gardens quite openly .
16  like all or most raven species , the white-necked raven form flocks after leaving their parents and once fully matured will pair off and form territories .
17  it is often found in the company of other scavengers such as kites or vultures .
18 nests are bowls of sticks lined with grass , hair , and wool , found mainly on cliff ledges but occasionally found in trees .
19  there are usually 3-5 eggs laid .
