0 baird's sparrow (ammodramus bairdii) is a species of north american birds in the family emberizidae of order passeriformes .
1  it is a migratory bird native the united states , canada , and mexico .
2 the baird's sparrow can be identified as a small brown streaked sparrow .
3  their faces are a yellow-brown color featuring subtle black markings .
4  these birds have a narrow band of brown streaks on their chests .
5  this species can be distinguished from others by its unique broad ochre central crown stripe .
6  juveniles exhibit similar coloration but often have more streaking .
7  adult size is comparable for both males and females , no sexual dimorphism is exhibited .
8  adults are generally about 12 cm and weigh 17-21 g; their wingspan is usually around 23 cm .
9 they are larger than le conte's sparrow and do not exhibit orange coloration on their faces .
10  they exhibit very similar coloration and patterning to henslow's sparrow but do not have green coloration on their faces .
11  the savannah sparrow is more heavily streaked and has an extra white marking on its head .
12 the baird's sparrow migrates from its summer breeding habitat , the tall grass prairies of north central united states and south central canada , to spend winters in northern mexico and the southern tip of the united states near texas .
13  due to this migratory behavior , they may be spotted all across the midwest portion of the united states during migratory seasons , but most frequently can be found in north dakota , south dakota , minnesota , montana , and canada during the summer .
14 this species of sparrow resides in grassland habitats .
15  these birds rely on the (now diminishing) tallgrass prairies , mixed grass prairies , and moister fescue prairies of northern united states and southern canada .
16  the dwindling status of this habitat puts many animals whose lifestyles rely on these ecosystems in peril .
17  land featuring woody vegetation and cultivated land is generally not a suitable environment for baird's sparrows to thrive in .
18 baird's sparrow feed on the ground , picking up insects and grass seeds .
19 there is some concern about the conservation status of baird's sparrows; their numbers are reduced compared to historic numbers .
20  this species is listed under the iucn red list under the category of "least concern" .
21  maintaining the original habitat is important for this species because artificial habitat recreation is not suitable for these birds .
22  fragmentation can lead to adverse conditions for baird's sparrows , including increased nest parasitism .
23 baird's sparrows nest on the ground in either depressions or tufts of grass .
24  these nests are usually made out of grass and consist of two layers , with finer material on the inside .
25  these birds nest in small loose colonies .
26  a normal clutch size is usually two to six white-gray eggs with brown spots .
27  these birds are altricial , and rely on parental care for survival after hatching .
28 the baird's sparrow was named after the american naturalist spencer fullerton baird .
29 the baird's sparrow was first described in north dakota in 1843 by john james audubon and another record of this species was not made for 29 years following its discovery .
30 breeding populations of baird's sparrow fluctuate from year to year .
31  this is most likely the result of a variable environment including factors like wildfires , drought , and the movement of bison herds .
32  when confronted with danger or a potential predator , baird's sparrows may evade their foes by running on foot rather than flying away .
