0 the nashville warbler (oreothlypis ruficapilla) is a small songbird in the new world warbler family , found in north and central america .
1  it breeds in parts of the northern and western united states and southern canada , and migrates to winter in southern california and texas , mexico , and the north of central america .
2  it has a gray head and a green back , and its underparts are yellow and white .
3 at 12 cm (4.7 in), the nashville warbler is a small warbler .
4  both male and female nashville warblers have a gray head fading into a greenish back and wings , a white belly and a yellow throat and breast .
5  they have a complete white eye ring , no wing bars , and a thin pointed black bill .
6  adult males have a rusty brown patch on their crown , which is usually hard to see and often covered by gray feathers .
7  males will raise it slightly when agitated .
8  females and immature birds have a duller olive-grey head , and less bold yellow on their throat .
9  males have wingspans of 5.86.6 cm (2.32.6 in), and females 5.36.1 centimetres (2.12.4 in) .
10  the nashville warbler is closely related to virginia's warbler , lucy's warbler , and the colima warbler , the four sharing generally similar plumage .
11 the song of the nominate subspecies consists of a rapid seewit-seewit-seewit-ti-ti-ti .
12  males sing from open perches on the nesting territory .
13  the call sounds like a high seet .
14  western birds of the race ridgwayi have a slightly lower-pitched , richer song , and a sharper call note .
15 the nashville warbler was originally described as sylvia ruficapilla by alexander wilson in 1811, using a name which had already been used by john latham , but not in a valid description according to the international code of zoological nomenclature .
16  possibly unintentionally , wilson spelled its name as sylvia rubricapilla in a later volume in 1812, and this spelling was once commonly used .
17  the genus sylvia is now restricted to old world species of the family sylviidae , unrelated to species such as the nashville warbler , that are classified in the new world warbler family parulidae .
18  until recently , most taxonomies have put this species in the genus vermivora .
19  however , this species forms a clade with several related species classed in vermivora , such as the tennessee warbler and lucy's warbler , which are more closely related to the flame-throated warbler and crescent-chested warbler than to other species of vermivora .
20  they therefore are now classified in the genus oreothlypis along with the flame-throated and crescent-chested warblers , although the new genus leothlypis was initially proposed for the nashville warbler and allies , excluding the latter two species .
21 two subspecies exist , with discrete breeding ranges .
22  the nominate subspecies , o .
23  r .
24  ruficapilla , breeds in northeastern north america .
25  the other subspecies , o .
26  r .
27  ridgwayi , known as the calaveras warbler , nests in western north america .
28  the latter differs from the former in its relatively duller plumage and more persistent tail movements .
29 nashville warblers breed in two distinct areas , one in canada and the northeastern united states , and another in the western united states .
30  the northeastern part of its range extends from cte-nord and cape breton island in eastern canada to central alberta .
31  for the most part , it only breeds between about 52 and 45.5 degrees north , but it is also found less commonly in the appalachians of pennsylvania and west virginia .
32  although named after nashville , tennessee , the nashville warbler only visits that area during migration .
33  they migrate to southernmost texas and california , mid-mexico , and the northernmost parts of central america (guatemala and el salvador) in winter .
34  in their breeding range , they prefer open mixed woods and bog habitats .
35 nashville warblers forage by gleaning in the lower parts of trees and shrubs , frequently flicking their tails .
36  in winter , they join together into loose flocks , and sometimes join mixed-species feeding flocks .
37  these birds mainly eat insects , but will supplement this diet with berries and nectar in the winter .
38 nashville warblers conceal their nests on the ground under shrubs .
39  nests are open cups built out of bark strips , leaves , and moss , and are lined with fine materials such as feathers or hairs .
40  typically four or five eggs are laid in a clutch , and incubated for 1112 days .
41  only the female incubates the eggs , though the male brings her food .
42  on hatching , the young have no feathers apart from some brown down , and their eyes are closed .
43  juveniles fledge and leave the nest 11 days after hatching .
44 there is a single record of hybridization with the tennessee warbler .
