0 the red-faced cormorant , red-faced shag or violet shag , phalacrocorax urile , is a species of cormorant that is found in the far north of the pacific ocean and bering sea , from the eastern tip of hokkaid in japan , via the kuril islands , the southern tip of the kamchatka peninsula and the aleutian islands to the alaska peninsula and gulf of alaska .
1  the red-faced cormorant is closely related to the pelagic cormorant p .
2  pelagicus , which has a similar range , and like the pelagic cormorant is placed by some authors (e .
3 g .
4  johnsgaard) in a genus leucocarbo .
5   where it nests alongside the pelagic cormorant , the red-faced cormorant generally breeds the more successfully of the two species , and it is currently increasing in numbers , at least in the easterly parts of its range .
6   it is however listed as being of conservation concern{verify source|date=september 2009}, partly because relatively little is so far known about it .
7 the adult bird has glossy plumage that is a deep greenish blue in colour , becoming purplish or bronze on the back and sides .
8   in breeding condition it has a double crest , and white plumes on the flanks , neck and rump , and the bare facial skin of the lores and around the eyes is a bright orange or red , giving the bird its name; although the coloration is less vivid outside the breeding season , the red facial skin is enough to distinguish it from the otherwise rather similar pelagic cormorant .
9   its legs and feet are brownish black .
10   its wings ranges from 25 to 29 cm in extent , with females having on average about 5 cm shorter wings .
11   adults weigh between 1.5 and 2.3 kg , with females averaging 350g less than males .
12 analysis of stomach contents suggests that the red-faced cormorant is mainly a bottom feeder , taking cottids especially .
13   adults have few predators , though river otters may attempt to take them , as will corvids of various species , bald eagles and golden eagles .
14   gulls and corvids are common predators on eggs and chicks .
