0 the acadian flycatcher (empidonax virescens) is a small insect-eating bird of the tyrant flycatcher family .
1 adults have olive upperparts , darker on the wings and tail , with whitish underparts; they have a white eye ring , white wing bars and a wide bill .
2  the breast is washed with olive .
3  the upper part of the bill is dark; the lower part is yellowish .
4  this bird's song is an explosive peet-sa .
5  the call is a soft peet .
6  they also have a call similar to that of the northern flicker a unique two-note song described as "ka-zeep", and its location in its preferred habitat , are two features that help to identify this species .
7 the 15 species of this genus were once all thought to be a single species , which was discovered in acadia in present-day nova scotia .
8  differences in range , voice , and habitat eventually identified them as separate species .
9  the present-day "acadian flycatcher" is not found in acadia .
10 its breeding habitat is deciduous forests , often near water , across the eastern united states and southwestern ontario .
11  these birds migrate through eastern mexico and the caribbean to southern central america and the very northwest of south america in colombia , western venezuela , and ecuador .
12 the numbers of these birds have declined somewhat in the southern parts of their range .
13  brown-headed cowbirds lay eggs in the nests of these birds in some areas .
14  however only 16% of cowbird young in acadian flycatcher nests fledge successfully .
15 they wait on a perch in the middle of a tree and fly out to catch insects in flight (hawking), also sometimes picking insects from foliage while hovering (gleaning) .
16  they may eat some berries and seeds .
17 they make a loose cup nest in a horizontal fork in a tree or shrub .
18 the acadian flycatcher is an excellent flier; it is extremely maneuverable , can hover , and can even fly backward .
19  curiously , there is no scientific information on hopping or walking by this bird .
20 as of october 2015 there have been 2 records of acadian flycatcher in europe , the first being a bird found dead in iceland in 1967, and the second a bird found on the beach at dungeness in kent , england in september 2015, the latter's identity being established by dna from its droppings .
