0 the parakeet auklet (aethia psittacula) is a small seabird of the north pacific .
1  it used to be placed on its own in the genus cyclorrhynchus (kaup , 1829) but recent morphological and genetic evidence suggest it should be placed in the genus aethia .
2  it is associated with the boreal waters of alaska and kamchatka and siberia .
3  it breeds on the cliffs , slopes and boulder fields of offshore islands , generally moving south during the winter .
4  the parakeet auklet is a small (23 cm) auk with a short orange bill that is upturned to give the bird its curious fixed expression .
5  the bird's plumage is dark above and white below .
6  with a single white plume projecting back from the eye .
7  there is a small amount of variation between breeding and winter plumage .
8  the parakeet auklet is a highly vocal species at the nest , calling once it arrives at the nest and then duetting once its mate arrives .
9  it makes a series of rhythimc hoarse calls (like that of the cassin's auklet) and a quavering squeal .
10  the function of these are unknown , but could be associated with defending its burrow from intruders and strengthening the bond with its mate .
11 the parakeet auklet's food varies with season , during the breeding season it takes mostly small planktonic crustaceans such as euphausiids , copepods and amphipods .
12  recent research shows it also preys on jellyfish in some areas .
13  it often feeds at a considerable distance from the colony , diving up to 30 m to reach its prey .
14  breeding begins in april and may in colonies that are often shared with other auk species .
15  the pair lay one egg , which is incubated for just over a month , the chick is then fed 4 times a day for around 35 days .
16  the chick fledges at night , flying out to sea alone .
17 the parakeet auklet is not considered threatened , there are estimated to be over a million individuals in the north pacific .
18  it is not thought to have declined recently , but may be threatened in the future by introduced predators and oil spills .
