0 the western meadowlark (sturnella neglecta) is a medium-sized icterid bird , about 8.5 in (21.6 cm) long .
1   it nests on the ground in open country in western and central north america .
2   it feeds mostly on insects , but also seeds and berries .
3   it has distinctive calls described as watery or flute-like , which distinguish it from the closely related eastern meadowlark .
4 adults have yellow underparts , with a black "v" on the breast , and white flanks which are streaked with black .
5  their upper parts are mostly brown , but also have black streaks .
6  these birds have long pointed bills and their heads are striped with light brown and black .
7 their breeding habitats are grasslands , prairies , pastures , and abandoned fields , all of which may be found from across western and central north america to northern mexico .
8  where their range overlaps with the eastern species , these birds prefer thinner , drier vegetation; the two types of birds generally do not interbreed but do defend territory against one another .
9  their nests are situated on the ground , and are covered with a roof woven from grass .
10  there may be more than one nesting female in a male's territory .
11  their nests are sometimes destroyed by mowing operations with eggs and young in them .
12 western meadowlarks will interbreed with eastern meadowlarks where their ranges overlap; however , resulting young appear to have low fertility .
13 western meadowlarks are permanent residents throughout much of their range .
14  northern birds may migrate to the southern parts of their range; some birds also move east in the southern united states .
15 these birds forage on the ground or in low to semi-low vegetation .
16  they sometimes search for food by probing with their bills .
17  they mainly eat insects , although they will devour seeds and berries .
18  in winter , these birds often feed in flocks .
19 these birds have a flute-like warbled song .
20  these calls contrast with the simple , whistled call of the eastern meadowlark .
21  these two species were considered to be the same species for some time; the western species , having been overlooked for some time , was given the species name neglecta .
22 this is the state bird of kansas , montana , nebraska , north dakota , oregon and wyoming .
23   only the northern cardinal is the state bird of more states .
